Clique Gossiping
Skip to main content
X
Cultural advice
The Australian National University acknowledges, celebrates and pays our respects to the Ngunnawal and Ngambri people of the Canberra region and to all First Nations Australians on whose traditional lands we meet and work, and whose cultures are among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are advised that ANU Library collections may include images, names, voices, and other representations of deceased persons.
Material in the collection may contain terms, language or views that reflect the period in which the item was created and may be considered inappropriate today.Cultural advice
Open Research Repository
Library
Log In
Log in with SSO
Log in
Have you forgotten your password?
Communities & Collections
Browse Open Research
Statistics
About
Contribute
Related Links
Home
ANU Research
ANU Scholarly Output
ANU Research Publications
Clique Gossiping
Clique Gossiping
Loading...
Date
2019
Authors
Liu, Yang
Li, Bo
Anderson, Brian
Shi, Guodong
Journal Title
Journal ISSN
Volume Title
Publisher
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE Inc)
Abstract
This paper proposes and investigates a framework
for clique gossip protocols. As complete subnetworks, the existence of cliques is ubiquitous in various social, computer, and
engineering networks. By clique gossiping, nodes interact with
each other along a sequence of cliques. Clique-gossip protocols
are defined as arbitrary linear node interactions where node
states are vectors evolving as linear dynamical systems. Such
protocols become clique-gossip averaging algorithms when node
states are scalars under averaging rules. We generalize the
classical notion of line graph to capture the essential node
interaction structure induced by both the underlying network and
the specific clique sequence. We prove a fundamental eigenvalue
invariance principle for periodic clique-gossip protocols, which
implies that any permutation of the clique sequence leads to
the same spectrum for the overall state transition when the
generalized line graph contains no cycle. We also prove that for
a network with n nodes, cliques with smaller sizes determined
by factors of n can always be constructed leading to finite-time
convergent clique-gossip averaging algorithms, provided n is not
a prime number. Particularly, such finite-time convergence can
be achieved with cliques of equal size m if and only if n is
divisible by m and they have exactly the same prime factors.
A proven fastest finite-time convergent clique-gossip algorithm is
constructed for clique-gossiping using size-m cliques. Additionally, the acceleration effects of clique-gossiping are illustrated via
numerical examples. Show more
Description
Keywords
Gossip protocols, cliques, scheduling, averaging algorithms
Citation
URI
http://hdl.handle.net/1885/307516
Collections
ANU Research Publications
Source
IEEE Transactions on Networking
Type
Journal article
Book Title
Entity type
Access Statement
License Rights
DOI
10.1109/TNET.2019.2952082
Restricted until
2099-12-31
Downloads
File
Description
Clique_Gossiping.pdf (2.01 MB)
Full item page
DSpace software copyright © 2002-2026 LYRASIS
Privacy policy
End User Agreement